# advanced.biodata.analysis
Assignment Advanced Biological Data Analysis 2018-2019

About 80% of all terrestrial plant species engage in a relationship with mycorrhizal fungi to improve resource and water acquisition from the soil in exchange for photosynthetically fixed carbon that is provided to the fungus. This interaction represents one of the most important mutualisms on Earth and has most likely been an important factor that has facilitated the colonization of land by plants. It is generally assumed that most mycorrhizal fungi are easily dispersed, occur widespread across the globe and consequently are not particularly limiting the distribution of the plants depending on them.
Differences in mycorrhizal communities between sites or populations therefore likely reflect differences in local soil and climatic conditions rather than the distances separating sites. Recent research investigating variation in arbuscular mycorrhizal communities associating with grassland herbs for example has shown that differences in mycorrhizal communities were primarily driven by environmental (abiotic) constraints and host selection (biotic constraints) and to a lesser extent by distances separating sites. Similarly, host-related, soil and atmospheric deposition variables explained the largest part of the overall community variance in ectomycorrhizal communities across Europe, while geographic distance had a smaller, yet still considerable impact. In this particular case, high levels of soil nitrogen were associated with a significant decrease in ectomycorrhizal availability. These and other examples indicate that environmental constraints can have a major impact on mycorrhizal community composition. Less, however, is known about how variation in mycorrhizal communities across sites affects the abundance, population dynamics and gene flow by seeds between populations of mycorrhizal plant species. 
This is particularly important for species that critically rely on mycorrhizal fungi for seed germination, such as the many species that produce dust seeds (e.g. orchids, members of the Gentianaceae or Pyroleae). Previous research has shown that mycorrhizal communities associating with the woodland orchid Neottia ovata showed strong variation between populations growing in forests embedded within an agricultural landscape, but that these differences had no noticeable effect on seed germination. Similarly, mycorrhizal communities differed significantly between occupied and unoccupied sites of the fen orchid (Liparis loeselii), but again these differences had no significant impact on seed germination success. In contrast, seeds from the dune ecotype of the broad-leaved helleborine (Epipactis helleborine) showed much lower protocorm formation when sown in forests and vice versa. Molecular investigation of the mycorrhizal fungi present in forests and dunes showed that the mycorrhizal communities were significantly different between forest and dune habitats, suggesting that local adaptation to environmental conditions or mycorrhizal communities can have a significant impact on seed germination patterns and therefore can act as a reproductive barrier for gene flow between diverging populations occupying different habitats.
In this study, the mycorrhizal communities associating with plants of the partially mycoheterotrophic Pyrola rotundifolia were investigated. This species is widely distributed across Eurasia, where it grows in a variety of habitats, including broad-leaved forest heaths, broad-leaved forests, rich swampy forests, fens, mountain birch woodland and tundra. However, in most places the species is rare and often declining. In Flanders (Belgium), the species can be found in two distinct habitats: temperate broad-leaved forest on nutrient-poor sandy soils and moist to wet dune slacks. According to some authors, dune populations of P. rotundifolia are different from forest populations in a number of morphological traits, including length of the flower stalk, style length and shape of the sepals. The two taxa have been called var. arenaria Koch [syn.: subsp. maritima (Kenyon) E.F. Warb.] and var. rotundifolia. 
Pyrola rotundifolia produces a large number of dust seeds that rely on fungi for germination (i.e. initial mycoheterotrophy). After germination, the species becomes partially photosynthetic, but still relies on fungi, mainly ectomycorrhizal fungi to meet its carbon demands (i.e. partial mycoheterotrophy). Germinating seeds and the first underground stages of several Pyrola species have been shown to associate with different fungi than adult plants, indicating differences in host specificity during seedling ontogeny. Broad host specificity may allow seeds to germinate in a wide range of habitats with contrasting mycorrhizal communities, whereas narrow host specificity and possible adaptation to local mycorrhizal communities may represent a serious bottleneck for germination when seeds are dispersed from one habitat to another. In this case, it can be expected that spatial or environmental variation in mycorrhizal community composition has a strong impact on patterns of seed germination and that selection against immigrants constitutes a barrier to gene flow and therefore contributes to the evolution of ecologically dependent reproductive isolation. Little, however, is known about how mycorrhizal communities differ between distinct habitats and whether differences affect patterns of seed germination. 
To test the hypothesis that mycorrhizal communities differ between the habitats where P. rotundifolia can be found, soil and root samples were collected in dune and forest populations. High throughput amplicon sequencing was used to assess the mycorrhizal communities present in dune and forest soils and to compare the mycorrhizal communities present in the soil with those found in the roots of seedlings and established adult plants. Soil analyses were performed to assess local growth conditions. The following variables were measured: soil moisture content (Moisture), pH, organic matter content (OM), NH4+ (NH4) and NO3- concentration (NO3), P concentration (P). Additionally, reciprocal seed germination experiments were performed to investigate whether seed germination at home sites was higher than that at no-home sites. Seeds were collected from dunes and forests and reciprocally sown in multiple plots in both habitats. This resulted in three datasets:

1)	soil variables (Soil.xlsx and Soil_fungi.xlsx)
2)	mycorrhizal communities (Mycorrhiza.xlsx)
3)	germination data (Germination.xlsx).

Datasets Soil.xlsx and Soil_fungi.xlsx contain information on soil variables and the mycorrhizal fungi found in the soil. Each variable in the mycorrhizal dataset contains information on the presence-absence of a large number of fungal OTUs (operational taxonomic units) observed at both sites. Six samples were taken in each habitat, resulting in twelve samples in total. Soil analyses and mycorrhizal analyses were performed on the same sample.  

The dataset Mycorrhiza.xlsx contains information on the mycorrhizal fungi (OTUs) found in the soil and on the roots of adult plants and seedlings in both habitats. Among seedlings, a distinction was made between seedlings coming from native and immigrant seeds. This led to four sample types (Soil – soil samples, Adult – roots from adult plants, Immigrant – roots from seedlings from immigrant seeds and Native – roots from seedlings from native seeds).  

The dataset Germination.xlsx contains data on the number of seedlings observed in seed packages buried in dune and forest habitat. Seeds originated from both dune and forest habitat and were reciprocally sown in both habitats. Germination experiments were performed at three different locations (indicated by the variable Plot). 

Using these data, you will test the hypotheses that:
1)	local environmental conditions differ significantly between dune and forest habitat;
2)	mycorrhizal communities in the soil differ significantly between populations of P. rotundifolia growing in dune and forest habitat and these differences can be explained by differences in soil variables; 
3)	in both habitats, mycorrhizal communities associating with adult plants and seedlings differ from those found in the soil, and adult plants and seedlings associate with different fungi;
4)	differences in mycorrhizal communities translate into differences in seed germination with native seeds showing significantly higher germination success than immigrant seeds. 

For each hypothesis tested, you write down the results in full sentences in a Word document and you provide all test-statistics and associated p-values. Outline which statistics you used and explain why and illustrate your results with appropriate plots. 

You will explain your analyses and results during the oral exam. Additionally, all R codes to perform the analyses have to be saved and brought to the oral exam.  

DEADLINE: 12.00 Friday 11th of January 2019 

